<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-37" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h2>
			<p>The little knight, as Basia had foreseen, cried out against her plans at once when he learned them, said he never would agree to them, for he could not go himself and he would not let her go without him; but on all sides began then prayers and insistence which were soon to bend his decision.</p>
			<p>Basia insisted less, indeed, than he expected, for she wished greatly to go with her husband, and without him the journey lost a part of its charm; but Eva knelt before the little knight, and kissing his hands implored him by his love for Basia to permit her to go.</p>
			<p>“No other will dare approach my father,” said she, “and mention such an affair⁠—neither I, nor Azya, nor even my brother. Basia alone can do it, for he refuses her nothing.”</p>
			<p>“Basia is no matchmaker,” said Pan Michael, “and, besides, you must come back here; let her do this at your return.”</p>
			<p>“God knows what will happen before the return,” answered Eva, with weeping⁠—“it is certain only that I shall die of suffering; but for such an orphan for whom no one has pity, death is best of all.”</p>
			<p>The little knight had a heart tender beyond measure, hence he began to walk up and down in the room. He wished above all not to part with his Basia, even for a day, and what must it be for two weeks! Still, it was clear that the prayers moved him deeply, for in a couple of days after those attacks he said one evening⁠—</p>
			<p>“If I could only go with you! But that cannot be, for service detains me.”</p>
			<p>Basia sprang to him, and putting her rosy mouth to his cheek began to cry⁠—</p>
			<p>“Go, Michael, go, go!”</p>
			<p>“It is not possible by any means,” answered Pan Michael, with decision.</p>
			<p>And again two days passed. During this time the little knight asked advice of Zagloba as to what he ought to do; but Zagloba refused to give advice.</p>
			<p>“If there are no other obstacles but your feelings,” said he, “what have I to say? Decide yourself. The house will be empty here without the haiduk. Were it not for my age and the hard road, I would go myself, for there is no life without her.”</p>
			<p>“But you see there is really no hindrance: the weather is a little frosty, that is all; for the rest, it is quiet, there are commands along the road everywhere.”</p>
			<p>“In that case decide for yourself.”</p>
			<p>After that conversation Pan Michael began to hesitate again, and to weigh two things. He was sorry for Eva. He paused also over this⁠—is it proper to send the girl alone with Azya on such a long road? and still more over another point⁠—is it proper to withhold help from devoted people when the opportunity to give it is so easy? For what was the real difficulty? Basia’s absence for two or three weeks. Even if it were only a question of pleasing Basia, by letting her see Mohiloff, Yampol, and Rashkoff, why not please her? Azya, in one event or another, must go with his squadron to Rashkoff; hence there would be a strong and even a superfluous guard in view of the destruction of the robbers, and the quiet during winter from the horde.</p>
			<p>The little knight yielded more and more, seeing which the ladies renewed their insistence⁠—one representing the affair as a good deed and a duty, the other weeping and lamenting. Finally Azya bowed down before the commandant. He knew, he said, that he was unworthy of such a favor, but still he had shown so much devotion and attachment to the Volodyovskis that he made bold to beg for it. He owed much gratitude to both, since they did not permit men to insult him, even when he was not known as the son of Tugai Bey. He would never forget that the wife of the commandant had dressed his wounds, and had been to him not only a gracious lady, but as it were a mother. He had given proofs of his gratitude recently in the battle with Azba Bey, and with God’s help in future he would lay down his head and shed the last drop of his blood for the life of the lady, if need be.</p>
			<p>Then he began to tell of his old and unfortunate love for Eva. He could not live without that maiden; he had loved her through whole years of separation, though without hope, and he would never cease to love her. But between him and old Pan Novoveski there was an ancient hatred, and the previous relation of servant and master separated them, as it were, by a broad ravine. The lady alone could reconcile them to each other; and if she could not do that, she could at least shelter the dear girl from her father’s tyranny, from confinement and the lash.</p>
			<p>Pan Michael would have preferred, perhaps, that Basia had not interfered in the matter; but as he himself loved to do good to people, he did not wonder at his wife’s heart. Still, he did not answer Azya affirmatively yet; he resisted even additional tears from Eva; but he locked himself up in the chancery and fell to thinking.</p>
			<p>At last he came out to supper on a certain evening with an agreeable expression of face, and after supper he asked Azya suddenly, “Azya, when is it time for you to go?”</p>
			<p>“In a week, your great mightiness,” answered the Tartar, unquietly. “Halim, it must be, will have concluded negotiations with Krychinski by that time.”</p>
			<p>“Give orders to repair the great sleigh, for you must take two ladies to Rashkoff.”</p>
			<p>When she heard this, Basia began to clap her hands, and rushed headlong to her husband. After her hurried Eva; after Eva, Azya bowed down to the little knight’s knees with a wild outburst of delight, so that Pan Michael had to free himself.</p>
			<p>“Give me peace!” said he; “what is there wonderful? When it’s possible to help people, it is hard not to help them, unless one is altogether heartless; and I am no tyrant. But do you, Basia, return quickly, my love; and do you, Azya, guard her faithfully; in this way you will thank me best. Well, well, give me peace!”</p>
			<p>Here his mustaches began to quiver, and then he said more joyously, to give himself courage⁠—</p>
			<p>“The worst are those tears of women; when I see tears there is nothing left of me. But you, Azya, must thank not only me and my wife, but this young lady, who has followed me like a shadow, exhibiting her sorrow continually before my eyes. You must pay her for such affection.”</p>
			<p>“I will pay her; I will pay her!” said Azya, with a strange voice; and seizing Eva’s hands, he kissed them so violently that it might be thought he wished rather to bite them.</p>
			<p>“Michael!” cried Zagloba, suddenly, pointing to Basia, “what shall we do here without her?”</p>
			<p>“Indeed it will be grievous,” said the little knight, “God knows it will!” Then he added more quietly: “But the Lord God may bless my good action later. Do you understand?”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Basia pushed in between them her bright head full of curiosity.</p>
			<p>“What are you saying?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing,” replied Zagloba; “we said that in spring the storks would come surely.”</p>
			<p>Basia began to rub her face to her husband’s like a real cat. “Michael dear! I shall not stay long,” said she, in a low voice.</p>
			<p>After this conversation new councils were held during several days touching the journey. Pan Michael looked after everything himself, gave orders to arrange the sleigh in his presence, and line it with skins of foxes killed in autumn. Zagloba brought his own lap-robe, so that she might have wherewith to cover her feet on the road. Sleighs were to go with a bed and provisions; and Basia’s pony was to go, so that she might leave her sleigh in dangerous places; for Pan Michael had a particular fear of the entrance to Mohiloff, which was really a breakneck descent. Though there was not the slightest likelihood of an attack, the little knight commanded Azya to take every precaution: to send men always a couple of furlongs in advance, and never pass the night on the road but in places where there were commands; to start at daylight, and not to loiter on the way. To such a degree did the little knight think of everything, that with his own hand he loaded the pistols for the holsters in Basia’s saddle.</p>
			<p>The moment of departure came at last. It was still dark when two hundred horse of the Lithuanian Tartars were standing ready on the square. In the chief room of the commandant’s house movement reigned also. In the chimneys pitchy sticks were shooting up bright flames. The little knight, Pan Zagloba, Pan Mushalski, Pan Nyenashinyets, Pan Hromyka, and Pan Motovidlo, and with them officers from the light squadrons, had come to say farewell. Basia and Eva, warm yet and ruddy from sleep, were drinking heated wine for the road. Pan Michael, sitting by his wife, had his arm around her waist; Zagloba poured out to her, repeating at each addition, “Take more, for the weather is frosty.” Basia and Eva were dressed in male costume, for women travelled generally in that guise on the frontiers. Basia had a sabre; a wildcat skin shuba bound with weasel-skin; an ermine cap with earlaps; very wide trousers looking like a skirt; and boots to her knees, soft and lined. To all this were to be added warm cloaks and shubas with hoods to cover the faces. Basia’s face was uncovered yet, and astonished people as usual with its beauty. Some, however, looked appreciatively at Eva, who had a mouth formed as it were for kisses; and others did not know which to prefer, so charming seemed both to the soldiers, who whispered in one another’s ears⁠—</p>
			<p>“It is hard for a man to live in such a desert! Happy commandant, happy Azya! Uh!”</p>
			<p>The fire crackled joyfully in the chimneys; the crowing of cocks began; day approached gradually, rather frosty and clear; the roofs of the sheds and the quarters of the soldiers, covered with deep snow, took on a bright rose color.</p>
			<p>From the square was heard the snorting of horses and the squeaking steps of soldiers and dragoons who had assembled from the sheds and lodgings to take farewell of Basia and the Tartars.</p>
			<p>“It is time!” said Pan Michael at last.</p>
			<p>Hearing this, Basia sprang from her place and fell into her husband’s arms. He pressed his lips to hers, then held her with all his strength to his breast, kissed her eyes and forehead, and again her mouth. That moment was long, for they loved each other immensely.</p>
			<p>After the little knight the turn came to Zagloba; then the other officers approached to kiss her hand, and she repeated with her childish voice, resonant as silver⁠—</p>
			<p>“Be in good health, gentlemen; be in good health!”</p>
			<p>She and Eva put on cloaks with openings instead of sleeves, and then shubas with hoods, and the two vanished altogether under these robes. The broad door was thrown open, a frosty steam rushed in, then the whole assembly found itself on the square.</p>
			<p>Outside everything was becoming more and more visible from the snow and daylight.</p>
			<p>Hoarfrost had settled on the hair of the horses and the sheepskin coats of the men; it seemed as though the whole squadron were dressed in white, and were sitting on white horses.</p>
			<p>Basia and Eva took their seats in the fur-lined sleigh. The dragoons and the soldiers shouted for a happy journey to the departing.</p>
			<p>At that sound a numerous flock of crows and ravens, which a severe winter had driven in near the dwellings of people, flew from the roofs, and with low croaking began to circle in the rosy air.</p>
			<p>The little knight bent over the sleigh and hid his face in the hood covering the face of his wife. Long was that moment; at last he tore himself away from Basia, and, making the sign of the cross, exclaimed⁠—</p>
			<p>“In the name of God!”</p>
			<p>Now Azya rose in the stirrups; his wild face was gleaming from delight and the dawn. He waved his whirlbat, so that his burka rose like the wings of a bird of prey, and he cried with a piercing voice:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Move on!”</p>
			<p>The hoofs squeaked on the snow; abundant steam came from the nostrils of the horses. The first rank moved slowly; after that the second, the third, and the fourth, then the sleigh, then the ranks of the whole detachment began to move across the sloping square to the gate.</p>
			<p>The little knight blessed them with the Holy Cross; at last, when the sleigh had passed the gate, he put his hands around his mouth, and called, “Be well, Basia!”</p>
			<p>But only the voices of muskets and the loud cawing of the dark birds gave him answer.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
