<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>LI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-51" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER LI.</h2>
			<p>Three weeks later, at midday, Pan Adam was in Hreptyoff. He had made the journey from Rashkoff so slowly because he had crossed to the other side of the Dnieper many times, while attacking chambuls and the perkulab's people along the river, at various stanitsas. These informed the Sultan's troops afterward that they had seen Polish detachments everywhere, and had heard of great armies, which surely would not wait for the coming of the Turks at Kamenyets, but would intercept their march, and meet them in a general battle.</p>
			<p>The Sultan, who had been assured of the helplessness of the Commonwealth, was greatly astonished; and sending Tartars, Wallachians, and the hordes of the Danube in advance, he pushed forward slowly, for in spite of his measureless strength, he had great fear of a battle with the armies of the Commonwealth.</p>
			<p>Pan Adam did not find Volodyovski in Hreptyoff, for the little knight had followed Motovidlo to assist the starosta of Podlyasye against the Crimean horde and Doroshenko. There he gained great victories, adding new glory to his former renown. He defeated the stern Korpan, and left his body as food to beasts on the open plain; he crushed the terrible Drozd, and the manful Malyshka, and the two brothers Siny, celebrated Cossack raiders, also a number of inferior bands and chambuls.</p>
			<p>But when Pan Adam arrived, Pani Volodyovski was just preparing to go with the rest of the people and the tabor to Kamenyets, for it was necessary to leave Hreptyoff, in view of the invasion. Basia was grieved to leave that wooden fortalice, in which she had experienced many evils, it is true, but in which the happiest part of her life had been passed, with her husband, among loving hearts, famous soldiers. She was going now, at her own request, to Kamenyets, to unknown fortunes and dangers involved in the siege. But since she had a brave heart, she did not yield to sorrow, but watched the preparations carefully, guarding the soldiers and the tabor. In this she was aided by Zagloba, who in every necessity surpassed all in understanding, together with Pan Mushalski, the incomparable bowman, who was besides a soldier of valiant hand and uncommon experience.</p>
			<p>All were delighted at the arrival of Pan Adam, though they knew at once, from the face of the knight, that he had not freed Eva or the sweet Zosia from Pagan captivity. Basia bewailed the fate of the two ladies with bitter tears, for they were to be looked on as lost. Sold, it was unknown to whom, they might be taken from the markets of Stambul to Asia Minor, to islands under Turkish rule, or to Egypt, and be confined there in harems; hence it was not only impossible to ransom them, but even to learn where they were.</p>
			<p>Basia wept; the wise Pan Zagloba wept; so did Pan Mushalski, the incomparable bowman. Pan Adam alone had dry eyes, for tears had failed him already. But when he told how he had gone down to Tykich near the Danube, had cut to pieces the Lithuanian Tartars almost at the side of the horde and the Sultan, and had seized Azya, the evil enemy, the two old men rattled their sabres, and said,—</p>
			<p>"Give him hither! Here, in Hreptyoff, should he die."</p>
			<p>"Not in Hreptyoff," said Pan Adam. "Rashkoff is the place of his punishment, that is the place where he should die; and the sergeant here found a torment for him which was not easy."</p>
			<p>He described then the death which Azya had died, and they listened with terror, but without pity.</p>
			<p>"That the Lord God pursues crime is known," said Zagloba at last; "but it is a wonder that the Devil protects his servants so poorly."</p>
			<p>Basia sighed piously, raised her eyes, and after a short meditation answered,—</p>
			<p>"He does, for he lacks strength to stand against the might of God."</p>
			<p>"Oh, you have said it," remarked Pan Mushalski, "for if, which God forfend, the Devil were mightier than the Lord, all justice, and with it the Commonwealth, would vanish."</p>
			<p>"I am not afraid of the Turks,—first, because they are such sons, and secondly, they are children of Belial," answered Zagloba.</p>
			<p>All were silent for a while. Pan Adam sat on the bench with his palms on his knees, looking at the floor with glassy eyes.</p>
			<p>"It must have been some consolation," said Pan Mushalski, turning to him; "it is a great solace to accomplish a proper vengeance."</p>
			<p>"Tell us, has it consoled you really? Do you feel better now?" asked Basia, with a voice full of pity.</p>
			<p>The giant was silent for a time, as if struggling with his own thoughts; at last he said, as if in great wonderment, and so quietly that he was almost whispering,—</p>
			<p>"Imagine to yourself, as God is dear to me, I thought that I should feel better if I were to destroy him. I saw him on the stake, I saw him when his eye was bored out, I said to myself that I felt better; but it is not true, not true."</p>
			<p>Here Pan Adam embraced his hapless head with his hands, and said through his set teeth,—</p>
			<p>"It was better for him on the stake, better with the auger in his eye, better with fire on his hands, than for me with that which is sitting within me, which is thinking and remembering within me. Death is my one consolation; death, death, that is the truth."</p>
			<p>Hearing this, Basia's valiant and soldier heart rose quickly, and putting her hands on the head of the unfortunate man, she said,—</p>
			<p>"God grant it to you at Kamenyets; for you say truly, it is the one consolation."</p>
			<p>He closed his eyes then, and began to repeat,—</p>
			<p>"Oh, that is true, that is true; God repay you!"</p>
			<p>That same afternoon they all started for Kamenyets.</p>
			<p>Basia, after she had passed the gate, looked around long and long at that fortalice, gleaming in the light of the evening; at last, signing herself with the holy cross, she said,—</p>
			<p>"God grant that it come to us to return to thee, dear Hreptyoff, with Michael! God grant that nothing worse be waiting for us!"</p>
			<p>And two tears rolled down her rosy face. A peculiar strange grief pressed all hearts; and they moved forward in silence. Meanwhile darkness came.</p>
			<p>They went slowly toward Kamenyets, for the tabor advanced slowly. In it went wagons, herds of horses, bullocks, buffaloes, camels; army servants watched over the herds. Some of the servants and soldiers had married in Hreptyoff, hence there was not a lack of women in the tabor. There were as many troops as under Pan Adam, and besides, two hundred Hungarian infantry, which body the little knight had equipped at his own cost, and had trained. Basia was their patron; and Kalushevski, a good officer, led them. There were no real Hungarians in that infantry, which was called Hungarian only because it had a Hungarian uniform. The non-commissioned officers were "veterans," soldiers of the dragoons; but the ranks were composed of robber bands which had been sentenced to the rope. Life was granted the men on condition that they would serve in the infantry, and with loyalty and bravery efface their past sins. There were not wanting among them also volunteers who had left their ravines, meadows, and similar robber haunts, preferring to join the service of the "Little Falcon" of Hreptyoff rather than feel his sword hanging over their heads. These men were not over-tractable, and not sufficiently trained yet; but they were brave, accustomed to hardships, dangers, and bloodshed. Basia had an uncommon love for this infantry, as for Michael's child; and in the wild hearts of those warriors was soon born an attachment for the wonderful and kind lady. Now they marched around, her carriage with muskets on their shoulders and sabres at their sides, proud to guard the lady, ready to defend her madly in case any chambul should bar their way.</p>
			<p>But the road was still free, for Pan Michael had more foresight than others, and, besides, he had too much love for his wife to expose her to danger through delay. The journey was made, therefore, quietly. Leaving Hreptyoff in the afternoon, they journeyed till evening, then all night; the next day in the afternoon they saw the high cliffs of Kamenyets.</p>
			<p>At sight of them, and at sight of the bastions of the fort adorning the summits of the cliffs, great consolation entered their hearts at once; for it seemed to them impossible that any hand but God's own could break that eagle's nest on the summit of projecting cliffs surrounded by the loop of the river. It was a summer day and wonderful. The towers of the churches looking out from behind the cliffs were gleaming like gigantic lights; peace, calm, and gladness were on that serene region.</p>
			<p>"Basia," said Zagloba, "more than once the Pagans have gnawed those walls, and they have always broken their teeth on them. Ha! how many times have I myself seen how they fled, holding themselves by the snout, for they were in pain. God grant it to be the same this time!"</p>
			<p>"Surely it will," said the radiant Basia.</p>
			<p>"One of their sultans, Osman, was here. It was—I remember the case as if to-day—in the year 1621. He came, the pig's blood, just over there from that side of the Smotrych, from Hotin, stared, opened his mouth, looked and looked; at last he asked, 'But who fortified that place so?' 'The Lord God,' answered the vizir. 'Then let the Lord God take it, for I am not a fool!' And he turned back on the spot."</p>
			<p>"Indeed, they turned back quickly!" put in Pan Mushalski.</p>
			<p>"They turned back quickly," said Zagloba; "for we touched them up in the flanks with spears, and afterward the knighthood bore me on their hands to Pan Lubomirski."</p>
			<p>"Then were you at Hotin?" asked the incomparable bowman. "Belief fails me, when I think where have you not been, and what have you not done."</p>
			<p>Zagloba was offended somewhat and said: "Not only was I there, but I received a wound, which I can show to your eyes, if you are so curious; I can show it directly, but at one side, for it does not become me to boast of it in the presence of Pani Volodyovski."</p>
			<p>The famous bowman knew at once that Zagloba was making sport of him; and as he did not feel himself competent to overcome the old noble by wit, he inquired no further, and turned the conversation.</p>
			<p>"What you say is true," said he: "when a man is far away, and hears people saying, 'Kamenyets is not supplied, Kamenyets will fall,' terror seizes him; but when he sees Kamenyets, consolation comes to him."</p>
			<p>"And besides, Michael will be in Kamenyets," cried Basia.</p>
			<p>"And maybe Pan Sobieski will send succor."</p>
			<p>"Praise be to God! it is not so ill with us, not so ill. It has been worse, and we did not yield."</p>
			<p>"Though it were worse, the point is in this, not to lose courage. They have not devoured us, and they will not while our courage holds out," said Zagloba.</p>
			<p>Under the influence of these cheering thoughts they grew silent. But Pan Adam rode up suddenly to Basia; his countenance, usually threatening and gloomy, was now smiling and calm. He had fixed his gazing eyes with devotion on Kamenyets bathed in sunbeams, and smiled without ceasing.</p>
			<p>The two knights and Basia looked at him with wonder, for they could not understand how the sight of that fortress had taken every weight from his soul with such suddenness; but he said,—</p>
			<p>"Praise be to the name of the Lord! there was a world of suffering, but now gladness is near me!" Here he turned to Basia. "They are both with the mayor, Tomashevich; and it is well that they have hidden there, for in such a fortress that robber can do nothing to them."</p>
			<p>"Of whom are you speaking?" asked Basia, in terror.</p>
			<p>"Of Zosia and Eva."</p>
			<p>"God give you aid!" cried Zagloba; "do not give way to the Devil."</p>
			<p>But Pan Adam continued, "And what they say of my father, that Azya killed him, is not true either."</p>
			<p>"His mind is disturbed," whispered Pan Mushalski.</p>
			<p>"Permit me," said Pan Adam again; "I will hurry on in advance. I am so long without seeing them that I yearn for them."</p>
			<p>When he had said this he began to nod his gigantic head toward both sides; then he pressed his horse with his heels, and moved on. Pan Mushalski, beckoning to a number of dragoons, followed him, so as to keep an eye on the madman. Basia hid her rosy face in her hands, and soon hot tears began to flow through her fingers.</p>
			<p>"He was as good as gold, but such misfortunes surpass human power. Besides, the soul is not revived by mere vengeance."</p>
			<p>Kamenyets was seething with preparations for defence. On the walls, in the old castle and at the gates, especially at the Roman gates, "nations" inhabiting the town were laboring under their mayors, among whom the Pole Tomashevich took the first place, and that because of his great daring and his rare skill in handling cannon. At the same time Poles, Russians, Armenians, Jews, and Gypsies, working with spades and pickaxes, vied with one another. Officers of various regiments were overseers of the work; sergeants and soldiers assisted the citizens; even nobles went to work, forgetting that God had created their hands for the sabre alone, giving all other work to people of insignificant estate. Pan Humyetski, the banneret of Podolia, gave an example himself which roused tears, for he brought stones with his own hands in a wheelbarrow. The work was seething in the town and in the castle. Among the crowds the Dominicans, the Jesuits, the brethren of Saint Francis, and the Carmelites circled about among the crowds, blessing the efforts of people. Women brought food and drink to those laboring; beautiful Armenian women, the wives and daughters of rich merchants, and Jewesses from Karvaseri, Jvanyets, Zinkovtsi, Dunaigrod, attracted the eyes of the soldiers.</p>
			<p>But the entrance of Basia arrested the attention of the throngs more than all. There were surely many women of more distinction in Kamenyets, but none whose husband was covered with more military glory. They had heard also in Kamenyets of Pani Volodyovski herself, as of a valiant lady who feared not to dwell on a watch-tower in the Wilderness among wild people, who went on expeditions with her husband, and who, when carried away by a Tartar, had been able to overcome him and escape safely from his robber hands. Her fame, therefore, was immense. But those who did not know her, and had not seen her hitherto, imagined that she must be some giantess, breaking horseshoes and crushing armor. What was their astonishment when they saw a small, rosy, half childlike face!</p>
			<p>"Is that Pani Volodyovski herself, or only her little daughter?" asked people in the crowds. "Herself," answered those who knew her. Then admiration seized citizens, women, priests, the army. They looked with no less wonder on the invincible garrison of Hreptyoff, on the dragoons, among whom Pan Adam rode calmly, smiling with wandering eyes, and on the terrible faces of the bandits turned into Hungarian infantry. But there marched with Basia a few hundred men who were worthy of praise, soldiers by trade; courage came therefore to the townspeople. "That is no common power; they will look boldly into the eyes of the Turks," cried the people in the crowd. Some of the citizens, and even of the soldiers, especially in the regiment of Bishop Trebitski, which regiment had come recently to Kamenyets, thought that Pan Michael himself was in the retinue, therefore they raised cries,—</p>
			<p>"Long live Pan Volodyovski!"</p>
			<p>"Long live our defender! The most famous cavalier!"</p>
			<p>"Vivat Volodyovski! vivat!"</p>
			<p>Basia listened, and her heart rose; for nothing can be dearer to a woman than the fame of her husband, especially when it is sounding in the mouths of people in a great city. "There are so many knights here," thought Basia, "and still they do not shout to any but my Michael." And she wanted to shout herself in the chorus, "Vivat Volodyovski!" but Zagloba told her that she should bear herself like a person of distinction, and bow on both sides, as queens do when they are entering a capital. And he, too, saluted, now with his cap, now with his hand; and when acquaintances began to cry "vivat" in his honor, he answered to the crowds,—</p>
			<p>"Gracious gentlemen, he who endured Zbaraj will hold out in Kamenyets!"</p>
			<p>According to Pan Michael's instructions, the retinue went to the newly built cloister of the Dominican nuns. The little knight had his own house in Kamenyets; but since the cloister was in a retired place which cannon-balls could hardly reach, he preferred to place his dear Basia there, all the more since he expected a good reception as a benefactor of the cloister. In fact, the abbess, Mother Victoria, the daughter of Stefan Pototski, voevoda of Bratslav, received Basia with open arms. From the embraces of the abbess she went at once to others, and greatly beloved ones,—to those of her aunt, Pani Makovetski, whom she had not seen for some years. Both women wept; and Pan Makovetski, whose favorite Basia had always been, wept too. Barely had they dried these tears of tenderness when in rushed Krysia Ketling, and new greetings began; then Basia was surrounded by the nuns and noble women, known and unknown,—Pani Bogush, Pani Stanislavski, Pani Kalinovski, Pani Hotsimirski, Pani Humyetski, the wife of the banneret of Podolia, a great cavalier. Some, like Pani Bogush, inquired about their husbands; others asked what Basia thought of the Turkish invasion, and whether, in her opinion, Kamenyets would hold out. Basia saw with great delight that they looked on her as having some military authority, and expected consolation from her lips. Therefore she was not niggardly in giving.</p>
			<p>"No one says," replied she, "that we cannot hold out against the Turks. Michael will be here to-day or tomorrow, at furthest in a couple of days; and when he occupies himself with the defences, you ladies may sleep quietly. Besides, the fortress is tremendously strong; in this matter, thank God, I have some knowledge."</p>
			<p>The confidence of Basia poured consolation into the hearts of the women; they were reassured specially by the promise of Pan Michael's arrival. Indeed, his name was so respected that, though it was evening, officers of the place began to come at once with greetings to Basia. After the first salutations, each inquired when the little knight would come, and if really he intended to shut himself up in Kamenyets. Basia received only Major Kvasibrotski, who led the infantry of the Bishop of Cracow; the secretary, Revuski, who succeeded Pan Lanchynski, or rather, occupied his place, was at the head of the regiment, and Ketling. The doors were not open to others that day, for the lady was road-weary, and, besides, she had to occupy herself with Pan Adam. That unfortunate young man had fallen from his horse before the very cloister, and was carried to a cell in unconsciousness. They sent at once for the doctor, the same who had cured Basia at Hreptyoff. The doctor declared that there was a serious disease of the brain, and gave little hope of Pan Adam's recovery.</p>
			<p>Basia, Pan Mushalski, and Zagloba talked till late in the evening about that event, and pondered over the unhappy lot of the knight.</p>
			<p>"The doctor told me," said Zagloba, "that if he recovers and is bled copiously, his mind will not be disturbed, and he will bear misfortune with a lighter heart."</p>
			<p>"There is no consolation for him now," said Basia.</p>
			<p>"Often it would be better for a man not to have memory," remarked Pan Mushalski; "but even animals are not free from it."</p>
			<p>Here the old man called the famous bowman to account for that remark.</p>
			<p>"If you had no memory you couldn't go to confession," said he; "and you would be the same as a Lutheran, deserving hell-fire. Father Kaminski has warned you already against blasphemy; but say the Lord's prayer to a wolf, and the wolf would rather be eating a sheep."</p>
			<p>"What sort of wolf am I?" asked the famous bowman, "There was Azya; he was a wolf."</p>
			<p>"Didn't I say that?" asked Zagloba. "Who was the first to say, that's a wolf?"</p>
			<p>"Pan Adam told me," said Basia, "that day and night he hears Eva and Zosia calling to him 'save;' and how can he save? It had to end in sickness, for no man can endure such pain. He could survive their death; he cannot survive their shame."</p>
			<p>"He is lying now like a block of wood; he knows nothing of God's world," said Pan Mushalski; "and it is a pity, for in battle he was splendid."</p>
			<p>Further conversation was interrupted by a servant, who announced that there was a great noise in the town, for the people were assembling to look at the starosta of Podolia, who was just making his entrance with a considerable escort and some tens of infantry.</p>
			<p>"The command belongs to him," said Zagloba. "It is valiant on the part of Pan Pototski to prefer this to another place, but as of old I would that he were not here. He is opposed to the hetman; he did not believe in the war; and now who knows whether it will not come to him to lay down his head."</p>
			<p>"Perhaps other Pototskis will march in after him," said Pan Mushalski.</p>
			<p>"It is evident that the Turks are not distant," answered Zagloba. "In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, God grant the starosta of Podolia to be a second Yeremi, and Kamenyets a second Zbaraj!"</p>
			<p>"It must be; if not, we shall die first," said a voice at the threshold.</p>
			<p>Basia sprang up at the sound of that voice, and crying "Michael!" threw herself into the little knight's arms.</p>
			<p>Pan Michael brought from the field much important news, which he related to his wife in the quiet cell before he communicated it to the military council. He had destroyed utterly a number of smaller chambuls, and had whirled around the Crimean camp and that of Doroshenko with great glory to himself. He had brought also some tens of prisoners, from whom they might select informants as to the power of the Khan and Doroshenko.</p>
			<p>But other men had less success. The starosta of Podlyasye, at the head of considerable forces, was destroyed in a murderous battle; Motovidlo was beaten by Krychinski, who pursued him to the Wallachian trail, with the aid of the Belgrod horde and those Tartars who survived Pan Adam's victory at Tykich. Before coming to Kamenyets, Pan Michael turned aside to Hreptyoff, wishing, as he said, to look again on that scene of his happiness.</p>
			<p>"I was there," said he, "right after your departure; the place had not grown cold yet, and I might have come up with you easily, but I crossed over to the Moldavian bank at Ushytsa, to put my ear toward the steppe. Some chambuls have crossed already, but are afraid that if they come out at Pokuta, they will strike on people unexpectedly. Others are moving in front of the Turkish army, and will be here soon. There will be a siege, my dove,—there is no help for it; but we will not surrender, for here every one is defending not only the country, but his own private property."</p>
			<p>When he had said this, he took his wife by the shoulders, and kissed her on the cheeks; that day they talked no more with each other.</p>
			<p>Next morning Pan Michael repeated his news at Bishop Lantskoronski's before the council of war, which, besides the bishop, was formed of Pan Mikolai Pototski, starosta of Podolia, Pan Lantskoronski, chamberlain of Podolia, Pan Revuski, secretary of Podolia, Pan Humyetski, Ketling, Makovetski, Major Kvasibrotski, and a number of other officers. To begin with, Volodyovski was not pleased with the declaration of Pan Pototski, that he would not take the command on himself, but confide it to a council.</p>
			<p>"In sudden emergencies, there must be one head and one will," said the little knight. "At Zbaraj there were three men to whom command belonged by office, still they gave it to Prince Yeremi, judging rightly that in danger it is better to obey one."</p>
			<p>These words were without effect. In vain did the learned Ketling cite, as an example, the Romans, who, being the greatest warriors in the world, invented dictatorship. Bishop Lantskoronski, who did not like Ketling,—for he had fixed in his mind, it is unknown why, that, being a Scot by origin, Ketling must be a heretic at the bottom of his soul,—retorted that the Poles did not need to learn history from immigrants; they had their own mind too, and did not need to imitate the Romans, to whom they were not inferior in bravery and eloquence, or if they were, it was very little. "As there is more blaze," said the bishop, "from an armful of wood than from one stick, so there is more watchfulness in many heads than in one." Herewith he praised the "modesty" of Pan Pototski, though others understood it to be rather fear of responsibility, and from himself he advised negotiations.</p>
			<p>When this word was uttered, the soldiers sprang from their seats as if scalded. Pan Michael, Ketling, Makovetski, Kvasibrotski, set their teeth and touched their sabres. "But I believe," said voices, "that we did not come here for negotiations!" "His robe protects the negotiator!" cried Kvasibrotski; "the church is your place, not this council!" and there was an uproar.</p>
			<p>Thereupon the bishop rose and said in a loud voice: "I should be the first to give my life for the church and my flock; but if I have mentioned negotiations and wish to temporize, God be my judge, it is not because I wish to surrender the fortress, but to win time for the hetman to collect reinforcements. The name of Pan Sobieski is terrible to the Pagans; and though he has not forces sufficient, still let the report go abroad that he is advancing, and the Mussulman will leave Kamenyets soon enough." And since he spoke so powerfully, all were silent; some were even rejoiced, seeing that the bishop had not surrender in his mind.</p>
			<p>Pan Michael spoke next: "The enemy, before he besieges Kamenyets, must crush Jvanyets, for he cannot leave a defensive castle behind his shoulders. Therefore, with permission of the starosta, I will undertake to enclose myself in Jvanyets, and hold it during the time which the bishop wishes to gain through negotiations. I will take trusty men with me; and Jvanyets will last while my life lasts."</p>
			<p>Whereupon all cried out: "Impossible! You are needed here! Without you the citizens will lose courage, and the soldiers will not fight with such willingness. In no way is it possible! Who has more experience? Who passed through Zbaraj? And when it comes to sorties, who will lead the men? You would be destroyed in Jvanyets, and we should be destroyed here without you."</p>
			<p>"The command has disposal of me," answered Pan Michael.</p>
			<p>"Send to Jvanyets some daring young man, who would be my assistant," said the chamberlain of Podolia.</p>
			<p>"Let Novoveski go!" said a number of voices.</p>
			<p>"Novoveski cannot go, for his head is burning," answered Pan Michael; "he is lying on his bed, and knows nothing of God's world."</p>
			<p>"Meanwhile, let us decide," said the bishop, "where each is to have his place, and what gate he is to defend."</p>
			<p>All eyes were turned to the starosta, who said: "Before I issue the commands, I am glad to hear the opinions of experienced soldiers; since Pan Volodyovski here is superior in military experience, I call on him first."</p>
			<p>Pan Michael advised, first of all, to put good garrisons in the castles before the town, for he thought that the main force of the enemy would be turned specially on them. Others followed his opinion. There were sixteen hundred men of infantry, and these were disposed in such manner that Pan Myslishevski occupied the right side of the castle; the left, Pan Humyetski, famous for his exploits at Hotin. Pan Michael took the most dangerous position on the side toward Hotin; lower down was placed Serdyuk's division. Major Kvasibrotski covered the side toward Zinkovtsi; the south was held by Pan Vansovich; and the side next the court by Captain Bukar, with Pan Krasinski's men. These were not volunteers indifferent in quality, but soldiers by profession, excellent, and in battle so firm that artillery fire was no more to them than the sun's heat to other men. Serving in the armies of the Commonwealth, which were always small in number, they were accustomed from youthful years to resist an enemy of ten times their force, and considered this as something natural. The general management of the artillery of the castle was under Ketling, who surpassed all in the art of aiming cannon. Chief command in the castle was to be with the little knight, with whom the starosta left the freedom of making sorties as often as there should be need and possibility.</p>
			<p>These men, knowing now where each would stand, were rejoiced heartily, and raised a considerable shout, shaking their sabres at the same time. Thus they showed their willingness. Hearing this, the starosta said to his own soul,—</p>
			<p>"I did not believe that we could defend ourselves, and I came here without faith, listening only to my conscience; who knows, however, but we may repulse the enemy with such soldiers? The glory will fall on me, and they will herald me as a second Yeremi; in such an event it may be that a fortunate star has brought me to this place."</p>
			<p>And as before he had doubted of the defence, so now he doubted of the capture of Kamenyets; hence his courage increased, and he began to advise more readily the strengthening of the town.</p>
			<p>It was decided to station Pan Makovetski at the Russian gate, in the town itself, with a handful of nobles, Polish towns-people, more enduring in battle than others, and with them a few tens of Armenians and Jews. The Lutsk gate was confided to Pan Grodetski, with whom Pan Juk and Pan Matchynski took command of artillery. The guard of the square before the town-house was commanded by Lukash Dzevanovski; Pan Hotsimirski had command of the noisy Gypsies at the Russian gate. From the bridge to the house of Pan Sinitski, the guards were commanded by Pan Kazimir Humyetski. And farther on were to have their quarters Pan Stanishevski, and at the Polish gate Pan Martsin Bogush, and at the Spij bastion Pan Skarzinski, and Pan Yatskovski there at the side of the Byaloblotski embrasures; Pan Dubravski and Pan Pyetrashevski occupied the butcher's bastion. The grand intrenchment of the town was given to Tomashevich, the Polish mayor, the smaller to Pan Yatskovski; there was an order to dig a third one, from which later a certain Jew, a skilful gunner, annoyed the Turks greatly.</p>
			<p>These arrangements made, all the council went to sup with the starosta, who at that entertainment honored Pan Michael particularly with place, wine, food, and conversation, foreseeing that for his action in the siege posterity would add to the title of "Little Knight" that of "Hector of Kamenyets." Volodyovski declared that he wished to serve earnestly, and in view of that intended to make a certain vow in the cathedral; hence he prayed the bishop to let him make it on the morrow.</p>
			<p>The bishop, seeing that public profit might come from the vow, promised willingly.</p>
			<p>Next morning there was a solemn service in the cathedral. Knights, nobles, soldiers, and common people heard it with devotion and elevation of spirit. Pan Michael and Ketling lay each in the form of a cross before the altar; Krysia and Basia were kneeling near by beyond the railing, weeping, for they knew that that vow might bring danger to the lives of their husbands.</p>
			<p>At the end of Mass, the bishop turned to the people with the monstrance; then the little knight rose, and kneeling on the steps of the altar, said with a moved but calm voice,—</p>
			<p>"Feeling deep gratitude for the special benefactions and particular protection which I have received from the Lord God the Most High, and from His only Son, I vow and take oath that as He and His Son have aided me, so will I to my last breath defend the Holy Cross. And since command of the old castle is confided to me, while I am alive and can move hands and feet, I will not admit to the castle the Pagan enemy, who live in vileness, nor will I leave the wall, nor will I raise a white rag, even should it come to me to be buried there under ruins. So help me God and the Holy Cross! Amen!"</p>
			<p>A solemn silence reigned in the church; then the voice of Ketling was heard.</p>
			<p>"I promise," said he, "for the particular benefactions which I have experienced in this fatherland, to defend the castle to the last drop of my blood, and to bury myself under its ruins, rather than let a foot of the enemy enter its walls. And as I take this oath with a clean heart and out of pure gratitude, so help me God and the Holy Cross! Amen!"</p>
			<p>Here the bishop held down the monstrance, and gave it to Volodyovski to kiss, then to Ketling. At sight of this the numerous knights in the church raised a buzz. Voices were heard: "We will all swear!" "We will lie one upon another!" "This fortress will not fall!" "We will swear!" "Amen, amen, amen!" Sabres and rapiers came out with a gritting from the scabbard, and the church became bright from the steel. That gleam shone on threatening faces and glittering eyes; a great, indescribable enthusiasm seized the nobles, soldiers, and people. Then all the bells were sounded; the organ roared; the bishop intoned, "Sub Tuum præsidium;" a hundred voices thundered in answer; and thus they prayed for that fortress which was the watchtower of Christendom and the key of the Commonwealth.</p>
			<p>At the conclusion of the service Ketling and Pan Michael went out of the church hand in hand. Blessings and praise were given them on the way, for no one doubted that they would die rather than surrender the castle. Not death, however, but victory and glory seemed to float over them; and it is likely that among all those people they alone knew how terrible the oath was with which they had bound themselves. Perhaps also two loving hearts had a presentiment of the destruction which was hanging over their heads, for neither Basia nor Krysia could gain self-composure; and when at last Pan Michael found himself in the cloister with his wife, she, choking from tears, and sobbing like a little child, nestled up to his breast, and said in a broken voice,—</p>
			<p>"Remember—Michael—God keep misfortune from you—I—I—know not what—will become of me!"</p>
			<p>And she began to tremble from emotion; the little knight was moved greatly too. After a time he said,—</p>
			<p>"But, Basia, it was necessary."</p>
			<p>"I would rather die!" said Basia.</p>
			<p>Hearing this, the little knight's mustaches quivered more and more quickly, and he repeated a number of times,—</p>
			<p>"Quiet, Basia, quiet." Then at last he said, to calm the woman loved above all,—</p>
			<p>"And do you remember that when the Lord God brought you back to me, I said thus, 'Whatever return is proper, O Lord God, I promise Thee. After the war, if I am alive, I will build a chapel; but during the war I must do something noteworthy, so as not to feed Thee with ingratitude'? What is a castle? It is little for such a benefaction. The time has come. Is it proper that the Saviour should say to Himself, 'His promise is a plaything'? May the stones of the castle crush me before I break my word of a cavalier, given to God. It is necessary, Basia; and that is the whole thing. Let us trust in God, Basia."</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
