<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">LV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-55" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</h2>
			<p>After that sortie the night was passed in desultory firing; at daylight it was announced that a number of Turks were standing near the castle, waiting till men were sent out to negotiate. Happen what might, it was needful to know what they wanted; therefore Pan Makovetski and Pan Myslishevski were appointed at the council to go out to the Pagans.</p>
			<p>A little later Pan Kazimir Humyetski joined them, and they went forth. There were three Turks⁠—Muhtar Bey, Salomi, the pasha of Rushchuk, and the third Kozra, an interpreter. The meeting took place under the open sky outside the gate of the castle. The Turks, at sight of the envoys, began to bow, putting their finger-tips to their hearts, mouths, and foreheads; the Poles greeted them politely, asking why they had come. To this Salomi answered⁠—</p>
			<p>“Dear men! a great wrong has been done to our lord, over which all who love justice must weep; and for which He who was before the ages will punish you, if you do not correct it straightway. Behold, you sent out of your own will Yuritsa, who beat with the forehead to our vizir and begged him for a cessation of arms. When we, trusting in your virtue, went out of the trenches, you began to fire at us from cannon, and rushing out from behind walls, covered the road with corpses as far as the tents of the Padishah; which proceeding cannot remain without punishment, unless you surrender at once the castles and the town, and show great regret and repentance.”</p>
			<p>To this Makovetski gave answer⁠—</p>
			<p>“Yuritsa is a dog, who exceeded his instructions, for he ordered his attendant to hang out a white flag, for which he will be judged. The bishop on his own behalf inquired privately if an armistice might be arranged; but you did not cease to fire in time of sending those letters. I myself am a witness of that, for broken stones wounded me in the mouth; wherefore you have not the right to ask us to cease firing. If you come now with an armistice ready, it is well; if not, tell your lord, dear men, that we will defend the walls and the town as before, until we perish, or what is more certain, till you perish, in these rocks. We have nothing further to give you, except wishes that God may increase your days, and permit you to live to old age.”</p>
			<p>After this conversation the envoys separated straightway. The Turks returned to the vizir; Makovetski, Humyetski, and Myslishevski to the castle. They were covered with questions as to how they had sent off the envoys. They related the Turkish declaration.</p>
			<p>“Do not receive it, dear brothers,” said Kazimir Humyetski. “In brief, these dogs wish that we should give up the keys of the town before evening.”</p>
			<p>To this many voices gave answer, repeating the favorite expression⁠—</p>
			<p>“That Pagan dog will not grow fat with us. We will not surrender; we will drive him away in confusion. We do not want him.”</p>
			<p>After such a decision, all separated; and firing began at once. The Turks had succeeded already in putting many heavy guns in position; and their balls, passing the “breastworks,” began to fall into the town. Cannoneers in the town and the castles worked in the sweat of their foreheads the rest of the day and all night. When any one fell, there was no man to take his place, there was a lack also of men to carry balls and powder. Only before daybreak did the uproar cease somewhat. But barely was the day growing gray in the east, and the rosy gold-edged belt of dawn appearing, when in both castles the alarm was sounded. Whoso was sleeping sprang to his feet; drowsy throngs came out on the streets, listening carefully. “They are preparing for an assault,” said some to others, pointing to the side of the castle. “But is Pan Volodyovski there?” asked alarmed voices. “He is, he is!” answered others.</p>
			<p>In the castles they rang the chapel bells, and rattling of drums was beard on all sides. In the half-light, half-darkness of morning, when the town was comparatively quiet, those voices seemed mysterious and solemn. At that moment the Turks played the “kindya;” one band gave the sounds to another, and they ran in that way, like an echo, through the whole immense tabor. The Pagan swarms began to move around the tents. At the rising day the towering intrenchments, ditches, and approaches came out of the darkness, stretching in a long line at the side of the castle. The heavy Turkish guns roared at once along its whole length; the cliffs of the Smotrych roared back in thundering echo; and the noise was as awful and terrible as if all the thunders in the storehouse of heaven had flashed and shot down together, bringing with them the dome of clouds to the earth.</p>
			<p>That was a battle of artillery. The town and the castles gave mighty answers. Soon smoke veiled the sun and the light; the Turkish works were invisible. Kamenyets was hidden; only one gray enormous cloud was to be seen, filled in the interior with lightning, with thunder and roaring. But the Turkish guns carried farther than those of the town. Soon death began to cut people down in Kamenyets. A number of cannon were dismounted. In service at the arquebuses, two or three men fell at a time. A Franciscan Father, who was blessing the guns, had his nose and part of his lip carried off by a wedge from under a cannon; two very brave Jews who assisted in working that cannon were killed.</p>
			<p>But the Turkish guns struck mainly at the intrenchment of the town. Pan Kazimir Humyetski sat there like a salamander, in the greatest fire and smoke: one half of his company had fallen; nearly all of those who remained were wounded. He himself lost speech and hearing; but with the aid of the Polish mayor he forced the enemy’s battery to silence, at least until new guns were brought to replace the old ones.</p>
			<p>A day passed, a second, a third; and that dreadful “colloquium” of cannon did not cease for an instant. The Turks changed gunners four times a day; but in the town the very same men had to work all the time without sleep, almost without food, stifled from smoke; many were wounded from broken stones and fragments of cannon carriages. The soldiers endured; but the hearts began to weaken in the inhabitants. It was necessary at last to drive them with clubs to the cannon, where they fell thickly. Happily, in the evening of the third day and through the night following, from Thursday till Friday, the main cannonading was turned on the castles.</p>
			<p>They were both covered, but especially the old one, with bombs from great mortars, which, however, “harmed little, since in darkness each bomb was discernible, and a man could avoid it.” But toward evening, when such weariness seized men that they fell off their feet from drowsiness, they perished often enough.</p>
			<p>The little knight, Ketling, Myslishevski, and Kvasibrotski answered the Turkish fire from the castles. The starosta looked in at them repeatedly, and advanced amid a hail of bullets, anxious, but regardless of danger.</p>
			<p>Toward evening, however, when the fire had increased still more, Pan Pototski approached Pan Michael.</p>
			<p>“Gracious Colonel,” said he, “we shall not hold out.”</p>
			<p>“While they confine themselves to firing we shall hold out,” answered the little knight; “but they will blow us out of here with mines, for they are making them.”</p>
			<p>“Are they really mining?” asked the starosta, in alarm.</p>
			<p>“Seventy cannon are playing, and their thunder is almost unceasing; still, there are moments of quiet. When such a moment comes, put down your ear carefully and listen.”</p>
			<p>At that time it was not needful to wait long, especially as an accident came to their aid. One of the Turkish siege-guns burst; that caused a certain disorder. They sent from other intrenchments to inquire what had happened, and there was a lull in cannonading.</p>
			<p>Pan Michael and the starosta approached the very end of one of the projections of the castle, and began to listen. After a certain time their ears caught clearly enough the resonant sound of hammers in the cliff.</p>
			<p>“They are pounding,” said the starosta.</p>
			<p>“They are pounding,” said the little knight.</p>
			<p>Then they were silent. Great alarm appeared on the face of the starosta; he raised his hands and pressed his temples. Seeing this, Pan Michael said⁠—</p>
			<p>“This is a usual thing in all sieges. At Zbaraj they were digging under us night and day.”</p>
			<p>The starosta raised his hand: “What did Prince Yeremi do?”</p>
			<p>“He withdrew from intrenchments of wide circuit into narrower ones.”</p>
			<p>“But what should we do?”</p>
			<p>“We should take the guns, and with them all that is movable, and transfer them to the old castle; for the old one is founded on rocks that the Turks cannot blow up with mines. I have thought always that the new castle would serve merely for the first resistance; after that we must blow it up with powder, and the real defence will begin in the old one.”</p>
			<p>A moment of silence followed; and the starosta bent his anxious head again.</p>
			<p>“But if we heave to withdraw from the old castle, where shall we go?” asked he, with a broken voice.</p>
			<p>At that, the little knight straightened himself, and pointed with his finger to the earth: “I shall go there.”</p>
			<p>At that moment the guns roared again, and a whole flock of bombs began to fly to the castle; but as darkness was in the world, they could be seen perfectly. Pan Michael took leave of the general, and went along the walls. Going from one battery to another, he encouraged men everywhere, gave advice; at last, meeting with Ketling, he said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Well, how is it?”</p>
			<p>Ketling smiled pleasantly.</p>
			<p>“It is clear as day from the bombs,” said he, pressing the little knight’s hand. “They do not spare fire on us.”</p>
			<p>“A good gun of theirs burst. Did you burst it?”</p>
			<p>“I did.”</p>
			<p>“I am terribly sleepy.”</p>
			<p>“And I too, but there is no time.”</p>
			<p>“Ai,” said Pan Michael; “and the little wives must be frightened; at thought of that, sleep goes away.”</p>
			<p>“They are praying for us,” said Ketling, raising his eyes toward the flying bombs.</p>
			<p>“God give them health!” said Pan Michael.</p>
			<p>“Among earthly women,” began Ketling, “there are none⁠—”</p>
			<p>But he did not finish, for the little knight, turning at that moment toward the interior of the castle, cried suddenly, in a loud voice⁠—</p>
			<p>“For God’s sake! Save us! What do I see?”</p>
			<p>And he sprang forward.</p>
			<p>Ketling looked around with astonishment. At a few paces distant, in the court of the castle, he saw Basia, with Zagloba and the Lithuanian, Pyentka.</p>
			<p>“To the wall! to the wall!” cried the little knight, dragging them as quickly as possible to the cover of the battlements. “For God’s sake!”</p>
			<p>“Ha!” said Zagloba, with a broken voice, and panting; “help yourself here with such a woman, if you please. I remonstrate with her, saying, ‘You will destroy yourself and me.’ I kneel down⁠—no use. Was I to let her go alone? Uh! No help, no help! ‘I will go; I will go,’ said I. Here she is for you!”</p>
			<p>Basia had fear in her face, and her brow was quivering as if before weeping. But it was not bombs that she feared, nor the whizzing of balls, nor fragments of stones, but the anger of her husband. Therefore she clasped her hands like a child fearing punishment, and exclaimed, with sobbing voice⁠—</p>
			<p>“I could not, Michael dear; as I love you, I could not. Be not angry, Michael. I cannot stay there when you are perishing here. I cannot; I cannot!”</p>
			<p>He had begun to be angry indeed, and had cried, “Basia, you have no fear of God!” but sudden tenderness seized him, his voice stuck in his throat; and only when that dearest bright head was resting on his breast, did he say⁠—</p>
			<p>“You are my faithful friend until death;” and he embraced her.</p>
			<p>But Zagloba, pressing up to the wall, said to Ketling: “And yours wished to come, but we deceived her, saying that we were not coming. How could she come in such a condition? A general of artillery will be born to you. I’m a rogue if it will not be a general. Well, on the bridge from the town to the castle, the bombs are falling like peas. I thought I should burst⁠—from anger, not from fear. I slipped on sharp pieces of shell, and cut my skin. I shall not be able to sit down without pain for a week. The nuns will have to rub me, without minding modesty. Uf! But those rascals are shooting. May the thunderbolts shoot them away! Pan Pototski wants to yield the command to me. Give the soldiers a drink, or they will not hold out. See that bomb! It will fall somewhere near us. Hide yourself, Basia! As God lives, it will fall near!”</p>
			<p>But the bomb fell far away, not near, for it fell on the roof of the Lutheran church in the old castle. Since the dome was very strong, ammunition had been carried in there; but this missile broke the dome, and set fire to the powder. A mighty explosion, louder than the thunder of cannon, shook the foundations of both castles. From the battlement, voices of terror were heard. Polish and Turkish cannon were silent.</p>
			<p>Ketling left Zagloba, and Volodyovski left Basia. Both sprang to the walls with all the strength in their limbs. For a time it was heard how both gave commands with panting breasts; but the rattle of drums in the Turkish trenches drowned their commands.</p>
			<p>“They will make an assault!” whispered Zagloba.</p>
			<p>In fact, the Turks, hearing the explosion, imagined apparently that both castles were destroyed, the defenders partly buried in the ruins, and partly seized with fear. With that thought, they prepared for the storm. Fools! they knew not that only the Lutheran church had gone into the air. The explosion had produced no other effect than the shock; not even a gun had fallen from its carriage in the new castle. But in the intrenchments the rattle of drums grew more and more hurried. Crowds of janissaries pushed out of the intrenchments, and ran with quick steps toward the castle. Fires in the castle and in the Turkish trenches were quenched, it is true; but the night was clear, and in the light of the moon a dense mass of white caps were visible, sinking and rising in the rush, like waves stirred by wind. A number of thousands of janissaries and several hundred volunteers were running forward with rage and the hope of certain victory in their hearts; but many of them were never again to see the minarets of Stambul, the bright waters of the Bosphorus, and the dark cypresses of the cemeteries.</p>
			<p>Pan Michael ran, like a spirit, along the walls. “Don’t fire! Wait for the word!” cried he, at every gun.</p>
			<p>The dragoons were lying flat at the battlements, panting with rage. Silence followed; there was no sound but that of the quick tread of the janissaries, like low thunder. The nearer they came, the more certain they felt of taking both castles at a blow. Many thought that the remnant of the defenders had withdrawn to the town, and that the battlements were empty. When they had run to the fosse, they began to fill it with fascines and bundles of straw, and filled it in a twinkle. On the walls, the stillness was unbroken.</p>
			<p>But when the first ranks stood on the stuff with which the fosse had been filled, in one of the battlement openings a pistol-shot was heard; then a shrill voice shouted⁠—</p>
			<p>“Fire!”</p>
			<p>At the same time both bulwarks, and the prolongation joining them, gleamed with a long flash of flame. The thunder of cannon, the rattle of musketry, and the shouts of the assailants were mingled. When a dart, hurled by the hand of a strong beater, sinks half its length in the belly of a bear, he rolls himself into a bundle, roars, struggles, flounders, straightens, and again rolls himself; thus precisely did the throng of janissaries and volunteers. Not one shot of the defenders was wasted. Cannon loaded with grape laid men flat as a pavement, just as a fierce wind levels standing grain with one breath. Those who attacked the extension, joining the bulwarks, found themselves under three fires, and seized with terror, became a disordered mass in the centre, falling so thickly that they formed a quivering mound. Ketling poured grape-shot from two cannon into that group; at last, when they began to flee, he closed, with a rain of lead and iron, the narrow exit between the bulwarks.</p>
			<p>The attack was repulsed on the whole line, when the janissaries, deserting the fosse, ran, like madmen, with a howl of terror. They began in the Turkish intrenchments to hurl flaming tar buckets and torches, and burn artificial fires, making day of night, so as to illuminate the road for the fugitives, and to make pursuit difficult for a sortie.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Pan Michael, seeing that crowd enclosed between the bulwarks, shouted for his dragoons, and went out against them. The unfortunate Turks tried once more to escape through the exit; but Ketling covered them so terribly that he soon blocked the place with a pile of bodies as high as a wall. It remained to the living to perish; for the besieged would not take prisoners, hence they began to defend themselves desperately. Strong men collected in little groups (two, three, five), and supporting one another with their shoulders, armed with darts, battle-axes, daggers, and sabres, cut madly. Fear, terror, certainty of death, despair, was changed in them into one feeling of rage. The fever of battle seized them. Some rushed in fury single-handed on the dragoons. These were borne apart on sabres in a twinkle. That was a struggle of two furies; for the dragoons, from toil, sleeplessness, and hunger, were possessed by the anger of beasts against an enemy that they surpassed in skill in using cold weapons; hence they spread terrible disaster.</p>
			<p>Ketling, wishing on his part to make the scene of struggle more visible, gave command to ignite tar buckets, and in the light of them could be seen irrestrainable Mazovians fighting against janissaries with sabres, dragging them by the heads and beards. The savage Lusnia raged specially, like a wild bull. At the other wing Pan Michael himself was fighting; seeing that Basia was looking at him from the walls, he surpassed himself. As when a venomous weasel breaks into grain where a swarm of mice are living, and makes terrible slaughter among them, so did the little knight rush like a spirit of destruction among the janissaries. His name was known to the besiegers already, both from previous encounters and from the narratives of Turks in Hotin. There was a general opinion that no man who met him could save himself from death; hence many a janissary of those enclosed between the bulwarks, seeing Pan Michael suddenly in front, did not even defend himself, but closing his eyes, died under the thrust of the little knight’s rapier, with the word “kismet” on his lips. Finally resistance grew weak; the remnant of the Turks rushed to that wall of bodies which barred the exit, and there they were finished.</p>
			<p>The dragoons returned now through the filled fosse with singing, shouting, and panting, with the odor of blood on them; a number of cannon-shots were fired from the Turkish intrenchments and the castle; then silence followed. Thus ended that artillery battle which lasted some days, and was crowned by the storm of the janissaries.</p>
			<p>“Praise be to God,” said the little knight, “there will be rest till the morning kindya at least, and in justice it belongs to us.”</p>
			<p>But that was an apparent rest only, for when night was still deeper they heard in the silence the sound of hammers beating the cliff.</p>
			<p>“That is worse than artillery,” said Ketling, listening.</p>
			<p>“Now would be the time to make a sortie,” said the little knight; “but ‘ ’tis impossible; the men are too weary. They have not slept and they have not eaten, though they had food, for there was no time to take it. Besides, there are always some thousands on guard with the miners, so that there may be no opposition from our side. There is no help but to blow up the new castle ourselves, and withdraw to the old one.”</p>
			<p>“That is not for to-day,” answered Ketling. “See, the men have fallen like sheaves of grain, and are sleeping a stone sleep. The dragoons have not even wiped their swords.”</p>
			<p>“Basia, it is time to go home and sleep,” said the little knight.</p>
			<p>“I will, Michael,” answered Basia, obediently; “I will go as you command. But the cloister is closed now; I should prefer to remain and watch over your sleep.”</p>
			<p>“It is a wonder to me,” said the little knight, “that after such toil sleep has left me, and I have no wish whatever to rest my head.”</p>
			<p>“Because you have roused your blood among the janissaries,” said Zagloba. “It was always so with me; after a battle I could never sleep in any way. But as to Basia, why should she drag herself to a closed gate? Let her remain here till morning.”</p>
			<p>Basia pressed Zagloba with delight; and the little knight, seeing how much she wished to stay, said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Let us go to the chambers.”</p>
			<p>They went in; but the place was full of lime-dust, which the cannon-balls had raised by shaking the walls. It was impossible to stay there, so they went out again, and took their places in a niche made when the old gate had been walled in. Pan Michael sat there, leaning against the masonry. Basia nestled up to him, like a child to its mother. The night was in August, warm and fragrant. The moon illuminated the niche with a silver light; the faces of the little knight and Basia were bathed in its rays. Lower down, in the court of the castle, were groups of sleeping soldiers and the bodies of those slain during the cannonade, for there had been no time yet for their burial. The calm light of the moon crept over those bodies, as if that hermit of the sky wished to know who was sleeping from weariness merely, and who had fallen into the eternal slumber. Farther on was outlined the wall of the main castle, from which fell a black shadow on one half of the courtyard. Outside the walls, from between the bulwarks, where the janissaries lay cut down with sabres, came the voices of men. They were camp followers and those of the dragoons to whom booty was dearer than slumber; they were stripping the bodies of the slain. Their lanterns were gleaming on the place of combat like fireflies. Some of them called to one another; and one was singing in an undertone a sweet song not beseeming the work to which he was given at the moment:⁠—</p>
			<div class="poem2">
				<p class="t0" style="text-indent:-4px">“Nothing is silver, nothing is gold to me now,<br/>
				Nothing is fortune.<br/>
				Let me die at the fence, then, of hunger,<br/>
				If only near thee.”</p>
			</div>
			<p>But after a certain time that movement began to decrease, and at last stopped completely. A silence set in which was broken only by the distant sound of the hammers breaking the cliffs, and the calls of the sentries on the walls. That silence, the moonlight, and the night full of beauty delighted Pan Michael and Basia. A yearning came upon them, it is unknown why, and a certain sadness, though pleasant. Basia raised her eyes to her husband; and seeing that his eyes were open, she said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Michael, you are not sleeping.”</p>
			<p>“It is a wonder, but I cannot sleep.”</p>
			<p>“It is pleasant for you here?”</p>
			<p>“Pleasant. But for you?”</p>
			<p>Basia nodded her bright head. “Oh, Michael, so pleasant! ai, ai! Did you not hear what that man was singing?”</p>
			<p>Here she repeated the last words of the little song⁠—</p>
			<div class="poem2">
				<p class="t0" style="text-indent:-4px">“Let me die at the fence, then, of hunger,<br/>
				If only near thee.”</p>
			</div>
			<p>A moment of silence followed, which the little knight interrupted⁠—</p>
			<p>“But listen, Basia.”</p>
			<p>“What, Michael?”</p>
			<p>“To tell the truth, we are wonderfully happy with each other; and I think if one of us were to fall, the other would grieve beyond measure.”</p>
			<p>Basia understood perfectly that when the little knight said “if one of us were to fall,” instead of <i>die</i>, he had himself only in mind. It came to her head that maybe he did not expect to come out of that siege alive, that he wished to accustom her to that termination; therefore a dreadful presentiment pressed her heart, and clasping her hands, she said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Michael, have pity on yourself and on me!”</p>
			<p>The voice of the little knight was moved somewhat, though calm.</p>
			<p>“But see, Basia, you are not right,” said he; “for if you only reason the matter out, what is this temporal existence? Why break one’s neck over it? Who would be satisfied with tasting happiness and love here when all breaks like a dry twig⁠—who?”</p>
			<p>But Basia began to tremble from weeping, and to repeat⁠—</p>
			<p>“I will not hear this! I will not! I will not!”</p>
			<p>“As God is dear to me, you are not right,” repeated the little knight. “Look, think of it: there above, beyond that quiet moon, is a country of bliss without end. Of such a one speak to me. Whoever reaches that meadow will draw breath for the first time, as if after a long journey, and will feed in peace. When my time comes⁠—and that is a soldier’s affair⁠—it is your simple duty to say to yourself: ‘That is nothing! Michael is gone. True, he is gone far, farther than from here to Lithuania; but that is nothing, for I shall follow him.’ Basia, be quiet; do not weep. The one who goes first will prepare quarters for the other; that is the whole matter.”</p>
			<p>Here there came on him, as it were, a vision of coming events; for he raised his eyes to the moonlight, and continued⁠—</p>
			<p>“What is this mortal life? Grant that I am there first, waiting till some one knocks at the heavenly gate. Saint Peter opens it. I look; who is that? My Basia! Save us! Oh, I shall jump then! Oh, I shall cry then! Dear God, words fail me. And there will be no tears, only endless rejoicing; and there will be no Pagans, nor cannon, nor mines under walls, only peace and happiness. Ai, Basia, remember, this life is nothing!”</p>
			<p>“Michael, Michael!” repeated Basia.</p>
			<p>And again came silence, broken only by the distant, monotonous sound of the hammers.</p>
			<p>“Basia, let us pray together,” said Pan Michael, at last.</p>
			<p>And those two souls began to pray. As they prayed, peace came on both; and then sleep overcame them, and they slumbered till the first dawn.</p>
			<p>Pan Michael conducted Basia away before the morning kindya to the bridge joining the old castle with the town. In parting, he said⁠—</p>
			<p>“This life is nothing! remember that, Basia.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
